title: Open Letter to a Freshman
date: 2012-9-1
template: essay.jade

*Originally published at [brownconversation.org](http://www.brownconversation.org)*

Dear Freshman,

Welcome to the greatest university-college on Earth! I'm glad you made
it---not everybody does. But you did. You accomplished what probably
seemed like your sole life goal for the last four (or maybe more)
years. You got into a great college---no wait, scratch that, I said
the greatest.

So now that you're going to Brown, you might be wondering: "Now what?"
Unfortunately, the first thing you'll learn at Brown is that nobody
can answer that for you. Actually, you won't "learn" that in the
conventional sense of the word. If you're like me, or like many other
Brown students I know, you'll spend at least the first year or two
here asking everyone you meet, "Now what?", and never getting a
straight answer. Of course, you won't just ask them outright, but
you'll come up with your own ways.

To your advisor, you'll ask: "What courses should I take?" To your
friends^[Yes, don't worry, you'll make friends.], you'll ask: "What do
you want to do after college?" To your family, you'll ask: "How is
everything back home?"

And that last one doesn't sound particularly related to the question
of "Now what?", but trust me, nostalgia is one of the first warning
signs that you might be suffering from the affliction that we all
share here: the plague of the plan-less.

Of course, in theory, you should already know what you're doing here.
In your application to Brown, you had to answer: "Why do you want to
go to college?" But in that context your answer was probably a bit
biased. You knew who would be reading it, and you had to show off your
good side. Since you got in, you were probably smart enough to not
just say, "Because my parents wanted me to," or, "Because I can get a
higher paying job if I have a degree." But those are both reasons that
a lot of people decide to go to college. I won't judge them as "good"
or "bad" reasons, but they are valid reasons. So now that you're off
the hook---now that nobody's watching---why don't you try again?

Exercise 1:
:   Answer truthfully: Why do you want to go to college?

Oh, you didn't know there would be exercises? Well I don't expect you
to just accept everything I say as gospel, so I'm adding in exercises
so you can prove (or disprove) my arguments to yourself.^[If you
disprove them, I'd love to hear how.] I strongly urge you to write
down the answers, both for posterity and because writing is a great
way to organize your thoughts.^[See Paul Graham's ["The Age of the
Essay"](http://www.paulgraham.com/essay.html)]

If you were able to complete the first exercise, then I'm very
impressed. When I first got to Brown, I don't think I really knew why
I was here. If you feel like I did, that's okay. Let me repeat that:
it's okay to not know why you're going to college. Or at least, it's
okay for now. But you should try to figure it out, because when you're
facing the abyss that is the Open Curriculum, you'll want to know what
your goals are.

In the coming days---and years---you're going to have to make a lot of
decisions. If you want to make good decisions, you need to know what
you're trying to achieve with your decisions.

Exercise 2:
:   Prove or disprove the following theorem: Making good
    decisions requires well-defined goals.

What do I mean when I talk about all these important decisions? Well,
here are some examples of decisions I've had to make since I started
Brown:

- What courses should I take?
- What grade option should I pick for each course?
- Should I go to class?
- How much time should I put into this reading/problem
  set/project/etc.?
- Which concentration should I choose?
- Where should I work over the summer?

These are all pretty practical academic decisions, but some have been
more subtle, such as:

- Should I follow my advisor's/friends'/parents' advice?
- How much should I drink tonight?
- Should I break up with my significant other?

Yes, believe it or not, decisions about your social life also depend
on what your goals are at Brown. Your goals might be more or less
academically- or socially-focused, and college has a knack for
interweaving your academic life with your social life.

You might be thinking, "I faced all these same decisions in high
school. What's so different about college?" Well in high school, you
had at least one well-defined goal: to get into college. In college,
the next step is much more hazy, as is the causal connection between
your actions now and your future pursuits.

You could say that the next step for all of us is to get a job, since
that's how one makes money to buy food and shelter. But just like
going to college wasn't the only option after high school, getting a
job and making money isn't the only option after college. You could,
after all, go to grad school. Or you could move back in with your
parents. Or you could travel.

If you do manage to decide on one of these goals, it's still not clear
what you need to do in college to achieve that goal. *College does not
work the same way as high school*. You don't necessarily get where you
want to go by getting good grades and accumulating activities on your
résumé.

Exercise 3:
:   Prove or disprove the following theorem: You won't get a job
    after college by getting good grades. Then prove or disprove this
    corrollary: You won't achieve your goals by getting good grades.

Now, I don't expect that you can give a very strong proof for or
against this theorem. At this point in your life, you don't have
enough information to support a statement like this. I don't either.
But *the* fundamental assumption up to this point in your life,
through all of schooling so far, is that the way to achieve your goals
is to get good grades.

This principle *may* still apply for you in college. But it might not.
The most important thing to realize is that it does not *necessarily*
apply in college just because it applied in high school. If it does
apply, you will need to rejustify it with new evidence.

How can you go about getting this evidence? Who has the information
that can justify the way you approach college? I've been trying to
answer these questions for a while. I've tried talking to professors,
deans, older students, alumni, and employers, among others. Each
person I talk to adds a new perspective, a couple more pixels that
help define my image of how the world after college works.

As an example of where this search might take you, I'll tell you some
of the conclusions I've reached for myself. Of course, these don't
apply to every Brown student. Some of my closest friends are following
principles that are in some ways the polar opposites of mine.

I decided that, for me, getting good grades is not the way to achieve
my goals for college (one of which is getting a job afterwards). It
took me two years at Brown to come to this conclusion, but once I did,
I stopped taking my courses for letter grades, and started using the
Satisfactory/No Credit option exclusively. I don't calculate a GPA to
put on my résumé.^[Fun fact: Brown doesn't calculate official GPAs
either. If you decide you want to have a GPA, you have to do it
yourself.]

My goal in telling you this is not to inspire you to do the same. I
haven't even given you any justification for my decision. My reasons
are complicated enough that it wouldn't be worth it to write them out
here.^[If you're interested in knowing, just ask. I like to talk
about it.] The reason I'm telling you my story is to show you
that it's possible to decide at the end of Exercise 3 that the
principles from high school don't apply for you in college.

When I first got to Brown, my freshman advisor gave me advice about
courses and grades: that I should take courses in a variety of
subjects; that I should take one course S/NC per semester (which I
should use to explore new subjects); and that I should always take
courses in my concentration for letter grades. This seems to be the
standard wisdom at Brown. In fact, you can find these same
recommendations in the section on Grade Options in your "Guide to
Brown" booklet. For some students, this may be a very good strategy.
Of course, it all depends on your goals.

This strategy did not line up with my goals. However, since
nobody told me that I could have my own strategy that corresponded
with my own goals, I followed the advice I was given without
questioning if it was appropriate for me.

Of course, nobody forced me to continue following this path, and when
I decided it wasn't for me, I was able to change. This is what makes
Brown so special. Nobody will stop you from doing what you want to do.
The curricular structures here are incredibly flexible. However,
nobody but you knows what you want to do. So if you ask others what to
do, they will never be able to give you a complete answer. They can
help---and their help will be indispensible---but ultimately you have
to take responsibility for your own path.

Exercise 4:
:   Building on your results from Exercise 1, come up with a plan for
    your academic life at Brown, including strategies for picking courses
    and choosing grade options.

This last exercise is a monumental task. You'll probably end up
changing your answer multiple times during your time at Brown. But
that's ok, because even if it seems intimidating, there are a lot of
resources that you can use to help gather information and clarify your
thoughts. Instead of trying to give you all my personal opinions and
advice (like I haven't already!), here are some places you can go to
try to answer some of the questions I've raised here:

The Curricular Resource Center
:   Run by students, the CRC's goal is
    to help students "fully engage with Brown's curriculum and utilize its
    academic resources." Here you'll find other students who know all the
    tricks to navigating the Open Curriculum. Find more info at the
    [CRC website](http://brown.edu/academics/college/advising/curricular-resource-center/).

The Brown Conversation
:   The Brown Conversation is a weekly dinner
    discussion group for students who are interested in thinking deeply
    about both the questions raised in this letter as well as anything
    else related to education at Brown. Drop in for a conversation and a
    delicious meal, or check out the [Brown Conversation website](http://brownconversation.org).

Me
:   How rude of me not to introduce myself. My name's Jonah. I'm a
    senior at Brown, class of 2013. If you have questions about my
    experience at Brown, want advice, or just want to complain about your
    roommate, I'd love to chat with you. Just shoot me an email at
    <a href="mailto:jonahkagan@gmail.com">jonahkagan@gmail.com</a>.

I wish you luck with your first year here. And once again, welcome to
the greatest university-college on Earth. It really is the greatest.
Trust me, you'll see.

Sincerely,

Jonah Kagan

P.S. If you don't mind sharing your answers to the exercises, I'd be
very interested to see what you wrote.
