title: Version Control
date: 2012-7-10
template: essay.jade

When programmers write code, they use version control software to
track their changes as they work. It's similar to how writers work in
drafts, except instead of adding a number to the end of the file name
each time they save, they have tools that handle all the details for
them.

When I decided to start writing essays, it seemed natural
to use version control to manage my drafts. So I set up
[Git](http://git-scm.com), my weapon of choice, to start tracking my edits.
Every time I make a change to an essay, I "commit" it, which tells Git
to remember what changed since I last committed.

Git is different from, say, the autosave feature in Microsoft Word, in
that I have to tell Git when I've made changes. Why not use a system
that notices changes automatically? Well, when it comes to programming
there are plenty of reasons. For instance, your code might not be in a
working state when the autosave kicks in, and when working
collaboratively, that could mean breaking things for somebody else.

But you can't break anything when you're writing, and plus, I'm
working alone. So why use Git? Well, in the beginning, I chose Git out
of habit. Now I'm starting to realize that Git is having an
interesting effect on my writing process.

Every time I commit changes, Git asks me to write a short message
summarizing the effect of the changes. As a programmer, the messages
are useful if I need to undo a commit or see what my teammates are
working on. As a writer, the messages themselves aren't very useful,
but having to write them forces me to think about the effect of the
edits I've made. Thinking about my edits makes me take a step back and
reflect on the essay as a whole. The question "What did I change?"
leads quickly to questions like "Why did I change it?" and "How did
that change affect the essay?"

Looking at one's work from a macro perspective is a valuable skill to
develop as a writer. And it's a difficult one---that's why we have
editors, after all. Git's commit message prompt is like a little
reminder to be my own editor.

I have a feeling there's also a second, more subtle benefit that comes
from writing commit messages. Besides being more conscious of the
essay I'm working on, I also think more about my writing process. This
hasn't led to any great insights yet, but I like to think of it as an
investment in the future. If I put in a little extra effort now, maybe
I'll benefit from it in the future.

This idea of trading small amounts of work for larger benefits down
the line is the principle that underlies version control in general.
Programmers are hoping that if they ever have to undo changes in the
future, keeping track of all the changes along the way will be
helpful. I'm hoping that all the little bits of self-observation that
come from writing commit messages will congeal into a more significant
insight.

I'm not the first to think this way. Buddhists assign great importance
to a practice they call mindfulness, which consists of trying to be
aware of one's mind and body in the present moment. Mindfulness is one
of elements of the Noble Eightfold Path---the path to enlightenment.
Some practitioners try to achieve mindfulness through longform
meditation. Others, though, try to live with mindfulness as they go
about their everyday activities.

The hardest part of trying to live with mindfulness, though, is
remembering to do it. There are millions of stimuli constantly
provoking our attention and shifting our thoughts. Being aware of your
mind and body is easy while taking a hot bath, but much harder when
navigating traffic or having a conversation.

But this is the nature of the practice of mindfulness. Practicing
mindfulness requires being mindful enough to remember to practice it.
Paradoxically, using version control when I write has prompted me to
be more mindful *without* having to think about it. Assuming
mindfulness is something to be desired, perhaps version control could
be used to stealthily promote mindfulness in other areas.

For instance, what if version control was used in schools to track
students' homework and tests? If asked to write summaries of their
work, students might become more conscious of their own learning. More
conscious learners would not only learn better, but also might be more
invested in their own learning. Many recent attempts to inject
technology into the classroom focus on aggregating data for teachers
or administrators. While version control would aggregate data as well,
the real benefit would come from the hidden side effect of promoting
mindful learning.

And what about version control on the larger scale? What would it mean
to apply version control to governments? Sure, we probably couldn't
undo the results of an election that didn't work out so well, but
could we create a culture of mindfulness, where politicians actively
log and reflect on their work?

If these ideas don't seem feasible, just think about how much data we
log in our everyday lives on email or social networks. We've become
quite adept at archiving our thoughts in the process of sharing them
with others. The idea with version control is to turn the focus back
onto ourselves. We're used to telling our computers what we're
thinking. The question is, are we willing to think about what we're
telling our computers?
